.xchapter Introduction
.xchapter Introduction
.xchapter Introduction
    $it This is a preliminary draft of a specification for the text
    editor called E. Neither this document nor the editor itself are
    yet complete. $rm

E is a text editor that is designed to run on a wide variety of
32-bit machines, from mainframes to personal workstations. Its
main use is expected to be as an interactive screen editor.
However, it can also function as a line-by-line editor, and it is
programmable. Because of the widely differing environments in
which E must run, and particularly because of the
non-availability of `single character interaction' on certain
mainframes, the facilities are restricted in some areas.

Versions of E currently exist for IBM's MVS
operating system (driving either SSMP
.index SSMP         .index SSMP      
.index IBM 3270:    .index IBM 3270: 
or IBM 3270 terminals), for DEC's VMS
operating system (driving SSMP terminals),
for Acorn's Panos operating system for 32016
co-processors, and for Acorn's Arthur
operating system for the Arch$~imedes
computer.

SM steSml cenMngmn rtclpbihdb h
United Kingdom Joint Network Team. A number of programmable
ter$~minals support this protocol,, including the BBC
Micro$~computer when fitted with an appropriate ROM chip,, and the
IBM PC (and its clones) when running the terminal emulator known
as `Soft',,

which originates from the University of Newcastle-Upon-Tyne.
.index University of Newcastle
There is also a `Fawn Box',, available through the Joint Network
Team,, which can be used to add SSMP facilities to a number of
non-programmable terminals.

They are described in
this document grouped by function,, but first there are
definitions of some terminology and a description of the areas in
which there are differences between the various versions of the
program. The chapter which follows describes how to use the
screen editing features of E,, while subsequent chapters cover the
many different commands avail$~able. Then there is detailed
information for each different im$~plemen$~tation and supported
terminal type,, and finally there are keystroke and command
summaries.


DESIGN OF E. SIMILAR FACILITIES ARE FREQUENTLY ENCOUNTERED,, AND
it is difficult to trace all the origins of many of them.. All these
short lineshort line---
short line
---short line
Operations On rectangles and sOme of the operations on single
lines and groups of lines are taken from the Curlew editor
implemented by the University of Newcastle-Upon-Tyne. Members of
the Cambridge Computer Laboratory and a number of other users of the
Cambridge mainframe have contributed useful ideas and criticism
to the design process.
.
.
.
 System dependencies
          Full details of the system-dependent and terminal-dependent
          features for each implementation of E are given near the end of
          this document. This chapter describes the areas in which
          differences occur.
          
.section The E command
.index command for running E
In all current implementations,, except that for VMS,, it is
possible to invoke E to update a file interactively by means of
the command
.display
e <<file name>>
.endd
WHERE THE FILE NAME FOLLOWS THE STANDARD CONVENTIONS OF THE
This is inserted with iline.
system. in vms the command name is \ee\ rather than \e\.
.index VMS
Other options may be given on the command line,, for example,, to
move to a particular line in the file before displaying the first
screen. In the Phoenix/MVS
.index Phoenix/MVS
im$~plemen$~tation the syntax for this is
.display
e <<file name>> opt '<<E commands>>'
.endd
but in other implementations different syntax may be used.


Extra line with a number 1234 in it.
Here are a couple of lines of text to be inserted via the
i command in E.
These lines are inserted
by means of the i command with no argument.

There is one blank line just above this.
abc abc abc123 abc123 123abc abc
tHE QUICK BROWN FOX JUMPS.
The quick brown fox jumps.
a short line             a short line
a short line             ...a short line
                                   a
                                   aa
                                  aaa
There's agap
This is a re&test re & test.
Here ara few brief words. And a as as well.
This line contains letters and digits 1234 and mix9tures.
